README.md, before:

# XseedSim

![XseedSim Synthetic Sequence Simulator](synthetic_reads.png)

This aim of this tool is to generate the synthetic RNA-Seq sequences by mutating the seed and xseed region (extra sequence after removing seed) by following poisson or gamma error distribution. In addition to the synthetic sequences, this tool also generate the ground truth. This tool can be used to evalute the ability of the tool/pipeline to correctly identify the RNA sequences.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

This tool has been developed in Python (version 3.6.9). The following libraries are required to run XseedSim sequence generation module:

```
-----------------------------------------------------
Packages                        Installation
-----------------------------------------------------
pandas                        pip install pandas
numpy                         pip install numpy
threading                     pip install threaded
-----------------------------------------------------
```
Rest of the requires packages such as `random,os,sys,gzip,time` are already included into python standard library.


### Installing

You can download this tool by cloning the github repository and use directly by switching to the tool directory.

```
git clone vivekruhela/XseedSim
cd XseedSim
```

## Arguments

```
usage: xseedsim.py [-h] [-i INPUT] [-t [TOTAL_SEQ]] [-p PURE_SEQ]
                   [-s SEED_ERROR_SEQ] [-x XSEED_ERROR_SEQ]
                   [-b BOTH_SEED_XSEED_ERROR_SEQ] [-d MIN_DEPTH]
                   [-e ENCODING_QUALITY] [-se SEED] [-o OUT_PATH]
                   [-n OUT_FILE_NAME] [-g GROUND_TRUTH_FILE] [-gff GFF_FILE]
                   [-q [OUT_FILE_TYPE]] [-dist [EXPRESSION_DISTRIBUTION]]
                   [-a [ADAPTOR]] [-th [THREAD]] [-r [REPLACEMENT]]
                   [-rna [RNA_TYPE]]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i INPUT, --input INPUT
                        Reference fasta file input. (default: None)
  -t [TOTAL_SEQ], --total_seq [TOTAL_SEQ]
                        Total number of sequence to be generated. (default:
                        10000)
  -p PURE_SEQ, --pure_seq PURE_SEQ
                        Fraction of pure sequence out of total generated
                        sequence. (default: 60)
  -s SEED_ERROR_SEQ, --seed_error_seq SEED_ERROR_SEQ
                        Fraction of sequence having impurity in seed region
                        out of total generated sequence. (default: 20)
  -x XSEED_ERROR_SEQ, --xseed_error_seq XSEED_ERROR_SEQ
                        Fraction of sequence having impurity in xseed region
                        (extra region outside seed region) out of total
                        generated sequence. (default: 10)
  -b BOTH_SEED_XSEED_ERROR_SEQ, --both_seed_xseed_error_seq BOTH_SEED_XSEED_ERROR_SEQ
                        Fraction of sequence having impurity in both seed and
                        xseed region outo of total generated sequence.
                        (default: 10)
  -d MIN_DEPTH, --min_depth MIN_DEPTH
                        Minimum depth of sequence to be generated. (default:
                        5)
  -e ENCODING_QUALITY, --encoding_quality ENCODING_QUALITY
                        Quality score encoding for fastq file (33/64) (requires -q).
                        (default: 33)
  -se SEED, --seed SEED
                        Seed. (default: 108)
  -o OUT_PATH, --out_path OUT_PATH
                        Path of saving output (fastq/fasta) file. (default:
                        None)
  -n OUT_FILE_NAME, --out_file_name OUT_FILE_NAME
                        Name of output sequence file (fastq/fasta). (default:
                        None)
  -g GROUND_TRUTH_FILE, --ground_truth_file GROUND_TRUTH_FILE
                        Name of output ground truth file. (default: None)
  -gff GFF_FILE, --gff_file GFF_FILE
                        GFF file. (default: None)
  -q [OUT_FILE_TYPE], --out_file_type [OUT_FILE_TYPE]
                        Output file type. (default: fastq)
  -dist [EXPRESSION_DISTRIBUTION], --expression_distribution [EXPRESSION_DISTRIBUTION]
                        Distribution type for expression values. (default:
                        poisson)
  -a [ADAPTOR], --adaptor [ADAPTOR]
                        Adaptor Sequence. (default: TGGAATTCTCGGGTGCCAAGG)
  -th [THREAD], --thread [THREAD]
                        Number of Parallel thread. (default: 2)
  -r [REPLACEMENT], --replacement [REPLACEMENT]
                        Sample RNAs with replacement (default: True)
  -rna [RNA_TYPE], --rna_type [RNA_TYPE]
                        RNA type (miRNA/piRNA/...). (default: miRNA)

```

### Example

(A) If you want to prepare the synthetic data that contains miRNA only (with default settings)

```
python xseedsim.py -i hsa_mature.fa -n mirna_raw_data.fastq.gz -g mirna_ground_truth.csv -gff hsa.gff3
```

(B) If you want to prepare the synthetic data that contains multiple type of RNAs (let's say mIRNA + piRNA + snoRNA) with following proportion:

```
Total Number of sequence = 100000
% of pure miRNA sequence                                      = 20% (i.e. 20000 sequences)
% of miRNA sequence with error in seed region                 = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of miRNA sequence with error in xseed region                = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of miRNA sequence with error in both seed and xseed region  = 5% (i.e. 5000 sequences)
% of pure piRNA sequences                                     = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of piRNA sequence with error in seed region                 = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of piRNA sequence with error in xseed region                = 5% (i.e. 5000 sequences)
% of piRNA sequence with error in both seed and xseed region  = 5% (i.e. 5000 sequences)
% of pure snoRNA                                              = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of snoRNA sequence with error in seed region                = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of snoRNA sequence with error in xseed region               = 5% (i.e. 5000 sequences)
% of snoRNA sequence with error in both seed and xseed region = 0% (i.e. 0 sequences)
                                                        Total = 100%
```

In order to generate such data you need to call XseedSim module separately for each RNA type using following commands `(assuming minimum dapth=default, file_type=fastq, encoding_quality=33, adaptor=default)`:

```
For miRNA synthetic data

python xseedsim.py -i hsa_mature.fa -n mirna_raw_data.fastq.gz -g mirna_ground_truth.csv -gff hsa.gff3 -t 100000 -p 20 -s 10 -x 10 -b 5 -se 1001 -th 6 -rna_type miRNA
```

```
For piRNA synthetic data

python xseedsim.py -i piRNA_reference.fa -n pirna_raw_data.fastq.gz -g pirna_ground_truth.csv -gff piRNA_hsa.gff3 -t 100000 -p 10 -s 10 -x 5 -b 5 -se 1001 -th 6 -rna_type piRNA
```

```
For snoRNA synthetic data

python xseedsim.py -i snoRNA_reference.fa -n snorna_raw_data.fastq.gz -g snorna_ground_truth.csv -gff snoRNA_hsa.gff3 -t 100000 -p 10 -s 10 -x 5 -b 0 -se 1001 -th 6 -rna_type snoRNA
```
After generating synthetic data for each individual RNA, merge these fastq files and their ground truth csv. e.g.
```
zcat mirna_raw_data.fastq.gz pirna_raw_data.fastq.gz snorna_raw_data.fastq.gz > synthetic_raw_data.fastq.gz
```

## Caveat

We have assumed that RNAs are present in  all the chromosomes. If there is no RNA present in the provided GFF file, no sequence will be generated for that chromosome and there will be a warning message for no RNA present in that chromosome and number of sequence generated will be lesser than provided total number of sequences.
## Authors

* **Vivek Ruhela** - *Initial work* - [github](https://github.com/vivekruhela)


## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.

Commit message:

Notebook added and expression adjustment for missing chromosome

README.md, after:

# XseedSim

![XseedSim Synthetic Sequence Simulator](synthetic_reads.png)

This aim of this tool is to generate the synthetic RNA-Seq sequences by mutating the seed and xseed region (extra sequence after removing seed) by following poisson or gamma error distribution. In addition to the synthetic sequences, this tool also generate the ground truth. This tool can be used to evalute the ability of the tool/pipeline to correctly identify the RNA sequences.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

This tool has been developed in Python (version 3.6.9). The following libraries are required to run XseedSim sequence generation module:

```
-----------------------------------------------------
Packages                        Installation
-----------------------------------------------------
pandas                        pip install pandas
numpy                         pip install numpy
threading                     pip install threaded
-----------------------------------------------------
```
Rest of the requires packages such as `random,os,sys,gzip,time` are already included into python standard library.


### Installing

You can download this tool by cloning the github repository and use directly by switching to the tool directory.

```
git clone vivekruhela/XseedSim
cd XseedSim
```

## Arguments

```
usage: xseedsim.py [-h] [-i INPUT] [-t [TOTAL_SEQ]] [-p PURE_SEQ]
                   [-s SEED_ERROR_SEQ] [-x XSEED_ERROR_SEQ]
                   [-b BOTH_SEED_XSEED_ERROR_SEQ] [-d MIN_DEPTH]
                   [-e ENCODING_QUALITY] [-se SEED] [-o OUT_PATH]
                   [-n OUT_FILE_NAME] [-g GROUND_TRUTH_FILE] [-gff GFF_FILE]
                   [-q [OUT_FILE_TYPE]] [-dist [EXPRESSION_DISTRIBUTION]]
                   [-a [ADAPTOR]] [-th [THREAD]] [-r [REPLACEMENT]]
                   [-rna [RNA_TYPE]]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i INPUT, --input INPUT
                        Reference fasta file input. (default: None)
  -t [TOTAL_SEQ], --total_seq [TOTAL_SEQ]
                        Total number of sequence to be generated. (default:
                        10000)
  -p PURE_SEQ, --pure_seq PURE_SEQ
                        Fraction of pure sequence out of total generated
                        sequence. (default: 60)
  -s SEED_ERROR_SEQ, --seed_error_seq SEED_ERROR_SEQ
                        Fraction of sequence having impurity in seed region
                        out of total generated sequence. (default: 20)
  -x XSEED_ERROR_SEQ, --xseed_error_seq XSEED_ERROR_SEQ
                        Fraction of sequence having impurity in xseed region
                        (extra region outside seed region) out of total
                        generated sequence. (default: 10)
  -b BOTH_SEED_XSEED_ERROR_SEQ, --both_seed_xseed_error_seq BOTH_SEED_XSEED_ERROR_SEQ
                        Fraction of sequence having impurity in both seed and
                        xseed region outo of total generated sequence.
                        (default: 10)
  -d MIN_DEPTH, --min_depth MIN_DEPTH
                        Minimum depth of sequence to be generated. (default:
                        5)
  -e ENCODING_QUALITY, --encoding_quality ENCODING_QUALITY
                        Quality score encoding for fastq file (33/64) (requires -q).
                        (default: 33)
  -se SEED, --seed SEED
                        Seed. (default: 108)
  -o OUT_PATH, --out_path OUT_PATH
                        Path of saving output (fastq/fasta) file. (default:
                        None)
  -n OUT_FILE_NAME, --out_file_name OUT_FILE_NAME
                        Name of output sequence file (fastq/fasta). (default:
                        None)
  -g GROUND_TRUTH_FILE, --ground_truth_file GROUND_TRUTH_FILE
                        Name of output ground truth file. (default: None)
  -gff GFF_FILE, --gff_file GFF_FILE
                        GFF file. (default: None)
  -q [OUT_FILE_TYPE], --out_file_type [OUT_FILE_TYPE]
                        Output file type. (default: fastq)
  -dist [EXPRESSION_DISTRIBUTION], --expression_distribution [EXPRESSION_DISTRIBUTION]
                        Distribution type for expression values. (default:
                        poisson)
  -a [ADAPTOR], --adaptor [ADAPTOR]
                        Adaptor Sequence. (default: TGGAATTCTCGGGTGCCAAGG)
  -th [THREAD], --thread [THREAD]
                        Number of Parallel thread. (default: 2)
  -r [REPLACEMENT], --replacement [REPLACEMENT]
                        Sample RNAs with replacement (default: True)
  -rna [RNA_TYPE], --rna_type [RNA_TYPE]
                        RNA type (miRNA/piRNA/...). (default: miRNA)

```

### Example

(A) If you want to prepare the synthetic data that contains miRNA only (with default settings)

```
python xseedsim.py -i hsa_mature.fa -n mirna_raw_data.fastq.gz -g mirna_ground_truth.csv -gff hsa.gff3
```

(B) If you want to prepare the synthetic data that contains multiple type of RNAs (let's say mIRNA + piRNA + snoRNA) with following proportion:

```
Total Number of sequence = 100000
% of pure miRNA sequence                                      = 20% (i.e. 20000 sequences)
% of miRNA sequence with error in seed region                 = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of miRNA sequence with error in xseed region                = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of miRNA sequence with error in both seed and xseed region  = 5% (i.e. 5000 sequences)
% of pure piRNA sequences                                     = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of piRNA sequence with error in seed region                 = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of piRNA sequence with error in xseed region                = 5% (i.e. 5000 sequences)
% of piRNA sequence with error in both seed and xseed region  = 5% (i.e. 5000 sequences)
% of pure snoRNA                                              = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of snoRNA sequence with error in seed region                = 10% (i.e. 10000 sequences)
% of snoRNA sequence with error in xseed region               = 5% (i.e. 5000 sequences)
% of snoRNA sequence with error in both seed and xseed region = 0% (i.e. 0 sequences)
                                                        Total = 100%
```

In order to generate such data you need to call XseedSim module separately for each RNA type using following commands `(assuming minimum dapth=default, file_type=fastq, encoding_quality=33, adaptor=default)`:

```
For miRNA synthetic data

python xseedsim.py -i hsa_mature.fa -n mirna_raw_data.fastq.gz -g mirna_ground_truth.csv -gff hsa.gff3 -t 100000 -p 20 -s 10 -x 10 -b 5 -se 1001 -th 6 -rna_type miRNA
```

```
For piRNA synthetic data

python xseedsim.py -i piRNA_reference.fa -n pirna_raw_data.fastq.gz -g pirna_ground_truth.csv -gff piRNA_hsa.gff3 -t 100000 -p 10 -s 10 -x 5 -b 5 -se 1001 -th 6 -rna_type piRNA
```

```
For snoRNA synthetic data

python xseedsim.py -i snoRNA_reference.fa -n snorna_raw_data.fastq.gz -g snorna_ground_truth.csv -gff snoRNA_hsa.gff3 -t 100000 -p 10 -s 10 -x 5 -b 0 -se 1001 -th 6 -rna_type snoRNA
```
After generating synthetic data for each individual RNA, merge these fastq files and their ground truth csv. e.g.
```
zcat mirna_raw_data.fastq.gz pirna_raw_data.fastq.gz snorna_raw_data.fastq.gz > synthetic_raw_data.fastq.gz
```

## Reference

Ruhela, Vivek et al., "MiRPipe: A Docker for RNA-Seq Bioinformatics Analysis"

## Authors

* **Vivek Ruhela** - *Initial work* - [github](https://github.com/vivekruhela)


## License

See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for license rights and limitations (Apache2.0).

## Acknowledgement

This work was supported by Infosys Centre for AI, IIIT Delhi.
